Claude Shannon at Bell Labs in 1948
came up with the information theory,
and the mathematical underpinnings
of all digital communications.
Here is a textbook blog diagram of
the communication model, plot diagram.
This is an information source that is
transmitted through your transmitter.
You have a noisy channel, and
the decoder does reverse of
what the channel encoder does.
And we talked about speech and
audio codecs,
that the reconstruction is
done by the destination.
So, some of the concepts here
are entropy of the signal.
This is a measure of how
much unpredictability or
uncertainty is there in
the information a source generates.
Think of your all SMS messages
over the last one year, and think
of all the projects that you submitted
in the final year of your college.
Clearly, the college reports
have a lot more words
of different meanings.
The size of the vocabulary is much bigger,
compared to the archive of your SMS.
So, the SMS archive has
much smaller entropy,
so you need very few bits
to send that data across
the channel compared to a more involved,
detailed text.
We looked at speech signals
that you're sampling at 8 kHz,
say maybe, 12 bits, to cover a 70 dB
dynamic range, you need 96 kHz/sec.
But, there is a lot of
redundancy in the source.
That the microphone generates and
sampled by the A to D converter, following
the latest Nyquist Sampling Theorem.
And the techniques that I explained
that you could compress it down
to eight kilobits per second,
and still maintain tall quality.
The side effect of this is,
once you have compressed this signal,
you have taken away all
the redundancy in the signal.
Each and every bit that you're
sending over the channel
is that much more important.
So, if you have a noisy channel, you
lose one bit, you fall that much harder.
The impact it has on the quality
of the receiver is so much more,
compared to if you were sending
a signal that is highly redundant,
let's say at 64 kilobits per second.
So what the encoder does is, of course,
if you have a clean channel,
a noiseless channel, then the source rate,
the rate at which the information
source is generating,
let's say the A to D converter
following the Nyquist Theorem.
It can be said that you send over
the channel, but there is always noise.
So in order to combat noise,
what the transmitter encoder does is
it acts in more redundancy in a known
manner, back to the data stream.
And at the receiver,
knowing the properties of
the way in which the transmitter acts,
you can remove that, and you can correct
some of the errors that were there
in the information that you
receive over a noisy channel.
This relates to the channel capacity.
So what Shannon's information theory,
the information
theoretical output is,
it explained all of these things so
that you could build practical
systems using these advanced concepts.